+++
title = "Introducing OpenSourcerer.eu"
date = "2024-10-24"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["Open Source", "Website"]
+++

# Welcome

Welcome to my - Lars Marowsky-Brée's - new site!

My aim is to complement my social media and other channels with more
Free, Libre, Open Source, IT, tech focused content, as [explained on the
about page](@/pages/about.md) in more detail.

## Tech stack

I need the barrier to writing and posting an article to be reasonably
low, and I have very low requirements on functionality, features, and
design.

Hence, this site uses a *Static Site Generator*, more specifically
[Zola](https://getzola.org/) to generate the web presence from Markdown
formatted content.

I opted for this path over dynamic site builders since it just fits my
workflow and preferences better. Similarly, I recognize there are other
options than Zola.

GitHub Pages, where I'm hosting this site mainly because of the very low
cost (zero is hard to beat, and while it is an "unnecessary"
entanglement with a US-based tech giant, I think the practical impact is
miniscule and easy to remove in the future if the need arises) and easy
integration with a text- & git-based workflow, offers Jekyll natively,
but I did in the past find that somewhat more tricky to use and build
the site locally for testing; and I had no interest in learning Ruby and
Gems.

The most likely alternative would have been [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).
Yet, my needs are entirely trivial, and Zola just appealed to me more,
plus *if* I ever have to investigate something in the core code, it'd
allow me to learn some more Rust. Win-win!

And while I have obviously immediately hit
[one](https://github.com/getzola/zola/issues/2677) or
[two](https://zola.discourse.group/t/page-wide-data-shortcodes-macros/2340/2)
limitations, I'm still quite happy with this choice. Since all content
is based on Markdown, I assume a transition to something else in the
future would be straightforward anyway.

# Future

I have no fixed schedule for content to appear on this site; since it's
a hobbyist project besides my actual job and personal life, don't expect
new content too frequently.

However, I have been known to ~go off on rants when something annoys me~
have well-researched opinions on significant topics and an interest in
sharing those thoughts publicly.

So I look forward to engaging with y'all!

