---
layout: post
title:  "The first Ceph community user survey"
date:   2018-07-13 12:00:00 +0200
categories: sds ceph community
---

To better understand how our current users utilize [Ceph][ceph], we
conducted a public community survey from May 1st to May 25th
2018.

In addition to the slides with the raw numbers, let's dive in and
discuss our results - if you have further comments, please reach out to
us on our [mailing list][ceph-users]!

= Demography

The amount of responses was very encouraging and shows a great interest
and a diverse, active community - we received **342** completed
responses from **52** different countries on **4** continents.

The majority of responses was from the Europe, Middle East, Africa
region, closely followed by North America, Asia-Pacific, and finally
Latin America.

The organizational background of the survey participants is largely
commercial, with a few academic institutions, and personal users.
Government adoption - or at least, participation in the survey - is
low.

= Key findings

== Why choose Ceph

Two reasons outshine all others: our users want an Open Source solution,
and it needs to be scalable.  Cost only shows up in third place,
suggesting that cost is not the main driver for Open Source adoption,
but a welcome one.

Alas, only two percent imply they choose Ceph for performance reasons,
which is consistent with the latter suggestions on where to focus going
forward.

== Ceph experience and user satisfaction

Our user base also shows a significant portion of long-term Ceph use:
just over 50% have been using it for more than two years (including
those with over 5 years).

At the same time, a rough quarter of our users is newer than a year,
with another quarter between 1 to 2 years. 

And how do our users like Ceph? Over **83%** indicated they are
(extremely) satisfied with the technology!

This suggests a healthy balance - Ceph is both adopted for the long-term
and persists in organizations due to its maturity and capabilities, but
we also see healthy growth year over year and new deployments.

== Size of Ceph deployments

=== Capacity

The second highest reason for choosing Ceph noted by respondents was its
scalability. This is also one of Ceph's greatest architectural
strengths and without equal.

It thus comes as no surprise that Ceph deployments are huge: over *25%*
are larger than 1 Petabyte, with **5% even above 10 Petabytes** in raw
installed capacity!

The most common order of magnitude falls into the 100 TB to 1 PB range;
with Ceph, these sites are well equipped for further growth.

We also see a percentage of systems using up to 10 TB; this shows that
if you just want to give it a try and familiarize you with the
technology, even a single server will do.

The usable capacity is lower, due to the need for either replication or
erasure coding to achieve the required levels of durability. Since
different types of redundancy can be mixed within a single cluster,
there is no simple, direct relation between raw and usable capacity in
this survey.

Still, half of our users have deployed more than 100 Terabytes worth of
usable capacity, and about a sixth of them are larger than 1 Petabyte.

**TODO: check if the raw survey data supports computing an "overall"
ratio?**

=== By node and device count

Echoing the massive scalability of Ceph, while the median Ceph cluster
consists of up to 10 nodes, about a third have between 10 to a 100 nodes,
and almost 10% of clusters are beyond a 100 nodes!

More than half have more than 50 storage devices; more than a third
exceed 100, and more than 5% are beyond a 1000. We had three respondents
with more than 10000 OSDs in their cluster. *Wow.*

== Ceph versions

Ceph is a very lively project with frequent releases.

Our survey shows over **80%** already running the latest stable release
(Luminous), which is an outstanding number given the size of
deployments. As expected, we also have a significant portion on the last
stable (Jewel), a few remaining Hammer installs, and a very low number
on older releases.

These numbers add up to 146 percent, suggesting that about half of our
user base operates at least two versions in parallel.

We can also see the significant difference caused by the previous
approach of alternating between stable and more aggressive releases.
This model has been abandoned with the Ceph Mimic version, but the
survey closed before the release of Mimic.

== Where do users source Ceph software from?

The majority of respondents indicates they are utilizing package builds
directly from the Ceph upstream project, followed by those included by
their distribution or their Ceph vendor. A few even build their own, or
even customize the build.

This is a big sign of trust in the quality assurance and release
processes of the upstream Ceph project!

=== Linux distribution of choice

The free-of-charge Linux distributions - Ubuntu, Debian, CentOS,
openSUSE - combined make up the largest share of deployments.

Yet, about 15% of our respondents indicated they are running Ceph on top
of a commercially supported Linux distribution (Red Hat Enterprise Linux
and SUSE Linux Enterprise).

And two users even indicated they are running Ceph on a BSD operating
system. Congratulations - we appreciate your efforts!

== Deployed hardware

Our survey respondents listed a very diverse choice of hardware vendors;
since Ceph is a Software-Defined-Storage solution capable of running on
any stable hardware platform, you can confidently choose the vendor most
appropriate for your environment.

Almost everyone (98.8%) uses x86-64 hardware.

=== Storage devices

Since Ceph is chosen for its scalability and large capacity, it is no
surprise that 89% use hard drives, which offer the best cost per
capacity still.

But a whole two thirds use SSDs, and already one third has deployed
NVMe-based storage, to either accelerate the HDD clusters or as pure
flash-only deployments.

=== Network bandwidth

More than two thirds (72%) of deployments take advantage of 10 GbE's
wide availability and low cost per port. (This includes 40 GbE setups,
which are four aggregated 10 GbE links.)

We still have one third of users that leverage 1 GbE networks - and
while this may come as a surprise, in a scale out solution, a thousand 1
GbE ports still deliver significant bandwidth and throughput!

Yet, around 13% already have deployed the new 25/50/100 GbE options,
which combine higher bandwidth with significantly improved latency. As
we see a shift to performance in focus, and a wider deployment of flash
storage, and further drops in price, this should see a significant
uptick.

Wrapping up networking, two thirds use a dedicated OSD cluster
network, and one third combines the public and private networks.

= Use cases

The data collected on use cases for Ceph as a whole and the respective
protocol front ends is quite extensive; you are encouraged to take a
look at the attached slides!

At a high level, all forms of *mode 2* deployments - virtualization,
public/private cloud use, containerization - are the primary drivers of
Ceph use. This reflects Ceph's early focus on integration with the major
platforms (such as OpenStack, Kubernetes/OpenShift, Proxmox).

As a massively scalable, capacity-oriented storage platform, Ceph is
also seeing significant (42.9%) adoption as an archive.

General use as home directories or HPC is comparatively low (about one
sixth each) still. With the already available and coming improvements to
Ceph and CephFS performance, we expect this to be a growth opportunity.

== Protocols

This is also reflected in the choice of protocols to access a Ceph
cluster - 84% utilize block (87% use RBD to boot virtual machines), 44%
file, and 42% S3 or Swift, showing that all protocols are relevant and
well adopted. A whole 15% has implemented native solutions on top of
librados.

These numbers are fairly consistent across the different lifecycle
stages of Ceph clusters; however, their might be an indication
that S3/Swift and librados are going to see increasing adoption in
future solutions that are currently under development.

== Block and interoperability

Over 17% indicate they re-export RBD to iSCSI. This indicates either
non-Linux clients, too old Linux distributions, or the need to introduce
an additional isolation layer between the client and the cluster.

A significant portion (13% of the total) are using the iSCSI
re-export to connect to their VMware workload. (Unfortunately, some of
the detail here has made it into the *future work* section below.)

== RadosGW - S3 and Swift

Primarily used for archive and backup, there is also one third reporting
"other" uses and a sizable portion for Big Data and Analytics,
reflecting diverse use cases.

As for access methods, three quarters (74%) opt for the widely adopted
S3 API, and one third uses Swift for their object data needs. (The
presentation has a further breakdown of the client libraries reported.)

Most users utilize Ceph's native RGW authentication, but 30% integrate
it with OpenStack Keystone and 15% with their LDAP environment.

Only 18.48% indicate they are not using any load balancer with RGW, and
haproxy and nginx being the top choices.

=== RGW multi-site

Over a quarter of our users (26%) indicate they operate more than one
site and utilize RGW multi-site federation, with some even reporting
more than 5 sites deployed. This allows them to address data locality as
well as disaster resilience.

== CephFS

The workloads indicated for CephFS truly are too diverse to pick any
clear winner. This is a good sign, since it indicates that CephFS
achieves its goal of being a general-purpose, scalable cluster file
system.

The vast majority of clients access CephFS natively from Linux systems,
with a preference for the in-kernel client over ceph-fuse.

A combined 35% make CephFS available to NFS-based clients, and another
21% connect clients via CIFS/Samba. This is significantly more diverse
than the RBD eco system.

We also see about 10% building native support for CephFS access into
their stack via libcephfs, which is exciting!

= Monitoring and management tools

== Management framework

This section reflects the huge diversity and number of choices available
to a Ceph user; however, we can already see the ceph-mgr dashboard
(which is part of Ceph upstream) emerging as the most widely named
framework. With Luminous, Mimic, and beyond, this is now the
consolidated focus of the Ceph community for management.

== Monitoring and dashboard

Grafana is the most popular choice here by far - not just as a
customized platform, but it also is the framework commonly used with
other metric collectors such as Prometheus.

The wide diversity here shows the challenge for Ceph; users have very
diverse monitoring and metric collection needs. Our roadmap will have to
prioritize and try to still allow integration with different stacks.

== Deployment frameworks

A large number of users still utilize ceph-deploy, followed by Ansible,
Puppet, and Salt. However, Chef and Juju are also still used, and 11%
indicate they use something else entirely; the same dilemma previously
explained applies.

= Helping our users

We also want to understand how we can better interact with our users.
Thus, a section of the survey focuses on the interactions between them
and the various communication channels offered by the Ceph community,
from documentation to commercial vendors for support.

== Commercial vendors

While 80% of the respondents indicated they do not contract support from
any commercial vendor, 20% do - from smaller companies and individual
contractors (that combined make up 7% of this market!), followed by
SUSE, Red Hat, and Canonical.

== Where do users turn for help

Two thirds of our users indicate they go and read the fabulous manual
first, which is great news and validates the effort put into this part
of the project. (If you want to have a positive impact in the community,
this shows great writers are *at least* as awesome as developers!)

Another 19% use our public mailing lists, and another 7% turn to their
commercial provider first.

= Feature adoption

== BlueStore and FileStore

One of the major new features introduced with Ceph Luminous is our new
improved and default OSD storage backend BlueStore. Again demonstrating
the trust and quality of the Ceph project, more than two thirds of our
users have already deployed this!

Of course, such a transition takes some time, and users need to be on
Luminous or newer to take advantage - 60% are (also) using FileStore
still, which remained fully supported.

== Preferred data redundancy modes

95% of our users have deployed replication in their Ceph cluster
somewhere. A full 25% are also taking advantage of the improved data
density and space utilization and flexible durability of Erasure
Coding.

The most common EC profiles are 8+3 and 4+2, but the numbers here really
reflect the diversity of needs in the durability versus capacity
trade-off.

= What do users want from Ceph next

A key question for us as a project is understanding what matters to our
users, and where we should focus our next efforts. Here, we have two
clear votes:

First, performance. Echoing the last place on the "why choose Ceph"
ranking, users clearly want us to make Ceph perform better.

Second, ease of use. As we could see in the respective section, the
management, monitoring, and deployment eco system around Ceph is very
diverse to the point of fragmentation, with no clear winners or easy
consolidation.

Our users also continue to value scalability. For large deployments, the
first and second priorities become especially critical.

The good news is that both areas are being addressed and taken
seriously. Expect great strides forward in the Mimic and especially
Nautilus releases!

And as Ceph adoption grows, interoperability - both between different
Ceph versions but also non-native clients - becomes crucial.

We also received a huge quantity of feedback in text form. We are very
grateful for this and will take your suggestions to heart!

= Further surveys and errata

As this was our first ever survey, we also learned many lessons on how
to further improve our questionnaire. These limitations are important to
understand and keep in mind when interpreting the raw results; we hope
to address them in future iterations of our survey.

This survey was mostly advertised via social media, the Ceph project
channels and mailing lists, and via some outreach by vendors. This
certainly introduces a selection bias; we are clearly skewed towards
the more active and community-oriented Ceph user base.

With 342 responses, we have a significant sample size, but for some
questions, the applicable response rate is lower.

We also don't always have answers as to why people responded in certain
ways or made certain choices. Please be mindful of this when
interpreting the data.

In some cases, we asked them about multiple cluster deployments, and in
others, about single cluster instances. This was not optimal and should
be clarified in future surveys - preferably by having a section that
repeats for each cluster, but we need to be mindful of not overloading
the survey length.

Some questions apparently were misleading; a full 25% of our users
indicated they use an "other" Erasure Code plugin rather than the four
different plugins that actually exist.

Similarly, the VMware access method responses (an active use case for
13% of our respondents!) unfortunately seems to have conflated their
current with their desired modes. We will have to dig a bit deeper into
this data, and clarify this in the future.

In some cases, we have unfortunately not provided the full list of
options - for RGW federated multi-sites, users could indicate *N/A*,
*2*, *3*, *4*, and *more than 5* only, and not *5 or more* as intended.

Some questions should have been multiple choice or rankings instead of
single choice.

We should also not ask users to answer questions that can be answered
automatically. Ceph Mimic has gained the first (and, of course, opt-in)
support for reporting some telemetry data; building on this will improve
the accuracy and sample size of future research.

= In conclusion

We would like to thank every respondent to our first Ceph Community
survey again! With your help and insights, we will be able to make Ceph
even better and more successful. We hope to hear from you again in future surveys!

Until then, we would be delighted if you would share and join the
conversation on our mailing lists, on social media, or an upcoming
conference or Ceph Day. What are your conclusions and thoughts?


[ceph]:         http://ceph.com/
[ceph-users]:   http://lists.ceph.com/listinfo.cgi/ceph-users-ceph.com/

